### Thomas Sheehan {#sheehan}

Thomas Sheehan (1941-) is an American professor of Religious Studies and German
philosophy. He was a student of William J. Richardson, whose work inaugurated
the 'classical paradigm' of Heidegger interpretation (i.e., that which holds
'Being itself' to be the central concern of Heidegger's philosophical career);
however, Sheehan's main text on Heidegger, entitled *Making Sense of Heidegger:
A Paradigm Shift*, claims to institute an updated and more accurate reading of
Heidegger's work.[^2] For Sheehan, Heidegger scholarship in the English language
has been dominated by two 'paradigms': firstly, the *existentialist* reading
that understood Heidegger primarily as the influence on French existentialism
(Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, etc.), focused on human being in its various modes of
existence: angst, authenticity, and so on. Secondly, the work of Richardson (and
also Otto Pögeller, whose *Martin Heidegger's Path of Thinking* was translated
into English in 1987) brought about a more strictly *ontological* reading of
Heidegger's work, seeing the analysis of human being as only a step towards the
understanding of being as such. In *Making Sense*, Sheehan draws from thousands
of citations in the *Gesamtausabe* to make the claim that, for his entire
career's work, Heidegger was not focused on 'being' (in the typical sense of the
word, i.e. that in virtue of which things *are*), but instead on the 'meaningful
presence' [*Anwesen*] of beings. When Heidegger uses the term 'Sein', Sheehan
argues, he is in fact referring not to the mere existence of entities
(Vorhandenheit), but to the way in which these entities *can be meaningful* to
us.

In *Making Sense*, Sheehan takes note of how Heidegger's 'philosophical
evolution' began with an interest in Aristotle; specifically, in Aristotle's
investigation into the question: 'What is a thing?' The unique element of
Heidegger's thought came about when he noticed that, in spite of all his
metaphysical insight, Aristotle had never asked: 'What is being itself?' -- that
is, what is it that opens itself up to us, and grounds things in their being?
Sheehan argues that Heidegger finds the answer to this latter question in
Parmenides, who refers (in F1.29) to 'well-rounded ἀλήθεια' as that which makes
any account of being possible. The task of Heidegger's work, according to
Sheehan, is therefore located two steps beyond the mere things of Aristotle's
metaphysics: Aristotle asked 'how come there are beings?' -- a question to which
the obvious answer is: being. Then follows the question, 'how come there "is"
being?', which -- for Sheehan's Heidegger -- is answered by the clearing
[*Lichtung*] that was implied by Parmenides. For Heidegger, the question is
therefore: how is it that there is this clearing? He aims to identify 'that
wherein being has its emergence and its openness (clearing -- disclosing) -- in
fact, wherein openness itself has its own emergence.' (GA 73). Seeing that it is
two steps away from Aristotle's work, Sheehan identifies Heidegger's thought as
meta-metaphysics. This understanding is defended by reference to the following
quotation from Heidegger, in his preface to the 1930 Japanese translation of
'What is Metaphysics?':

> 'As such, the author believes to have recognised that the more original
> elaboration of the traditional guiding-question of Western metaphysics --
> "what is a being?" -- is supported and led by the grounding-question, "what is
> being?". With this question, it is also asked: what grounds the inner
> possibility and necessity of the openness of being?' (GA 16, p. 66. Sheehan's
> translation).

Central to Sheehan's reading of Heidegger is the claim that Dasein *is* the
clearing: as the being for which other beings are meaningful, Dasein is the
ground of meaningfulness. From *Being and Time* onwards, therefore, Heidegger
can be seen as part of the transcendental tradition that starts with Descartes
and is revolutionised in Kant. The philosophical procedure of this tradition
sees the 'inquiring subject' become the 'subject of inquiry', as Sheehan puts
it. Furthermore, Dasein is in fact 'the thing itself' of Heidegger's inquiry, as
Sheehan claims in his essay 'Dasein'.[^3] This is because, according to *Making
Sense*, the real notion of 'being' that Heidegger's work was investigating was
never something hypostasised and separated from human existence. Being, as
meaningful presence, can never be separated from the hermeneutic Dasein who
enters a relation with beings-that-can-be-meaningful, and in so doing brings
about meaning.

So, if the subject matter of Heidegger's work is the openness or intelligibility
of being [*Sinn von Sein*], the revolutionary character of Heidegger's work (so
Sheehan argues) is its focus on the 'correlativity' of humans and being. It is
this focus that makes Heidegger's ontology *phenomenological*. Phenomenology
'regards things only insofar as they are meaningfully present to us within our
concerns and performances', Sheehan claims. Further, he suggests that the *only*
philosophical problems, from the phenomenological perspective, are those of
'sense, meaning, and signification'. Under this interpretation, Dasein -- the
open being for whom things are intelligible -- is present throughout Heidegger's
work.

In 2018, Sheehan privately published an essay titled 'Martin Heidegger:
Overcoming Metaphysics'. Introducing Heidegger as the German philosopher who --
despite being described as an 'existentialist' in the first half of the
twentieth century -- was in fact concerned less with human beings and more with
being as such, the essay aims to explain how Heidegger understood being in a
non-metaphysical way, precisely by 'overcoming' metaphysics. Sheehan opens his
exposition with two questions: what is metaphysics, and what does it mean to
'get free' of it?

In Aristotle's work, metaphysics is the 'queen of the sciences': it explores the
ultimate or highest reality of things, while the 'particular sciences' analyse
the nature and structure of particular things. For instance, biology explores
the contingent nature of contingent living beings, physics analyses particular
physical beings and forces, and so on. Metaphysics itself, in Aristotle's
system, is divided in two: ontology ('general metaphysics'), in Sheehan's words,
'deals with what constitutes the ultimate realness' of the totality of things.
Natural theology ('special metaphysics') deals with non-material things,
particularly and especially *God* as the 'highest being', insofar as such a
being can be known through reason and without revelation. This twofold character
of metaphysics is what led Heidegger to give it the name *ontotheology*.

The Aristotelian conception of metaphysics as ontotheology dominated philosophy
for many centuries: in the Arabic world, Ibn Sina (980-1037) used Aristotle's
*Metaphysics* to construct a systematic ontology and theology, and in the
following century Ibn Rushd (1126-1198) wrote commentaries on the *Metaphysics*
that brought about the Western renaissance of Aristotelian thought,
characterised by the work of Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274). Sheehan also mentions
Francisco Suarez, Jean-Baptiste du Hamel, and Christian Wolff as other prominent
philosophers of the Aristotelian tradition in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and
eighteenth centuries respectively.

So how does Heidegger escape the Aristotelian tradition of ontotheology? For
Sheehan, 'Heidegger's entire philosophy' begins this escape with a 'radically
new vision of human being'.

In constructing this 'vision', Heidegger emphasises that to be human is to be
*outside oneself*. I am not an internal subject who must reach into the
'external world' for experience and 'drag it back inside' in order to comprehend
it. Rather, I am always already placed alongside the things of the world. In
Sheehan's words, 'having a soul or mind means living *out in the world* with
whatever we encounter'. Furthermore, Sheehan argues, it is simply the raw
*things* that we are in the world with, but '*with the meanings* of things'. The
mind for Heidegger (though he rarely uses this word himself) is not a subjective
entity that can choose to 'experience things' at a moment's notice; instead, it
is better understood *as an act*, which is *continuously* concerned with the
things alongside it -- and with their meaning. This comes directly from Brentano
and Husserl's teaching that all consciousness is intentional. As Sheehan
understands it, the human being for Heidegger is an alethic being, or a
hermeneut. Heidegger takes the notion of intentionality or outsideness further,
by describing the human being as 'projected' [*entworfen*] and 'thrown'
[*geworfen*] into the world (of meaning). As humans, Sheehan explains, we are
always within a world; we cannot isolate ourselves within the 'internal' mind.
Furthermore, as has already been emphasised, the world within which we find
ourselves is not just a world of *things*, but of *meaningful* things which we
are involved and concerned with. (Heidegger uses the word *Sorge* to refer to
this concern).

Sheehan sees the repeated insistence on 'meaningfulness' [*Bedeutsumkeit*] as
further evidence of Heidegger's departure from Aristotle: whereas the
Aristotelian system understands the word 'logos' [*λόγος*] as *reason*, for
Sheehan's Heidegger it denotes the '*field of meaningfulness*' that
'illuminates' everything that the human being experiences. 'But', Sheehan
writes, 'this field of meaningfulness is not a "tool" that we "use" ... Rather,
it is what we *are*'. That things are 'lit up' around us, and able to be
interpreted, is *constitutive* of Heidegger's human. This very fact, Sheehan
claims, is what Heidegger believes 'metaphysics has overlooked ever since Plato
and Aristotle'.  Since these two figures saw the dawn of Western philosophy,
metaphysics has been concerned with the interaction between 'subjects' and
'objects', the former being the rational observer, and the latter being the 'raw
matter' of the universe, a 'collection of things'. Sheehan argues that Heidegger
accuses metaphysics of being 'ignorant of the open field of meaningfulness *that
brings subjects and objects together* in human knowledge and action' (my
emphasis).

For Heidegger, this 'open field' that ontotheology has disregarded is
called *the clearing* [*die Lichtung*, from 'licht' for 'light'].

The clearing was not overlooked by ontotheological metaphysics out of mere
stupidity. Instead, Sheehan explains, it was overlooked because of a kind of
paradox that it confronts us with: how are we to understand that which makes our
understanding possible? To do so would be like jumping over one's own shadow.
The clearing thus remains '*intrinsically hidden*' as it makes all encounters of
that which is *un-hidden* possible. Heidegger thus arrives, by different
reasoning, to St.  Augustine's conclusion that 'human being is fundamentally a
mystery to itself, a bottomless abyss (*homo abyssus est*)'. The overlooking of
the mystery of human being causes us to be alienated from ourselves. Though my
own existence is the closest thing to me (precisely because it is *what I am*),
it is also the *furthest*, since it is so concealed from me. Sheehan claims
that, for Heidegger, the domineering *technicity* that is seen in Western
culture is a consequence of the overlooking of the clearing.

If the clearing is intrinsically hidden from us, how are we to relate to it?
Sheehan argues that the 'unfathomable fact' of the human being as clearing is
'fundamentally the same' as the *present* fact that I can die at any moment: the
fact of mortality that pervades through much of *Being and Time*. My mortality
permeates my existence as the constant *presence* of an ultimate *absence*. 'In
that sense', Sheehan says, 'we are virtually "dead already".' However, an
embracing of this mysterious fact is, for Heidegger, the way towards living
*authentically* [*eigentlich*]. This sounds promising: a seemingly abstract task
-- that of overcoming ontotheology by way of embracing the mystery of a hidden
clearing -- might give way to a concrete vision of how to live one's life.
Unfortunately, Sheehan points out, 'Heidegger admits he has nothing to say about
how to concretely live out such an appropriation of ourselves'. At least in
Sheehan's reading, there is no ethical dimension to Heidegger's thought.

Sheehan concludes his essay by making a comparison between Heidegger and Kant.
In the *Critique of Pure Reason*, Kant was not merely 'against' metaphysics; in
fact, he acknowledged the existence of 'metaphysics as a natural predisposition'
(B 22), wherein humans are predisposed to ask questions that they cannot answer.
For Sheehan, this is similar to how Heidegger characterises the human being as
inevitably coming up against the clearing (which, after all, is what makes
experience possible in the first place), and yet unable to actually *comprehend*
this clearing. But while Kant's response was to put aside that which we cannot
cognise, and systematically account for what we *can* know, Heidegger's approach
is 'to urge one to embrace and live from out of that mysterious fact [of the
clearing]'. Heidegger's *overcoming* of metaphysics, therefore, actually takes
form as a journey 'beneath' metaphysics, to the fundamental constitution of
*oneself* that is both nearest and furthest from us.

#### The Sheehan-Farin Dialogue

In 2016, the Australian philosopher Ingo Farin published an essay in the 26^th^
issue of the journal *Parrhesia*, entitled 'A Response to Sheehan's Attempted
Paradigm Shift in Heidegger Studies'. In short, Farin argues that Sheehan's work
fails to instate a new paradigm of Heidegger interpretation, precisely because
it fails to correctly understand the whole of Heidegger's work.

Farin understands *Making Sense* as a critique of a tendency within Heidegger
studies to fall into '*Sein*-ology' or 'crypto-metaphysics', wherein being is
hypostasised as a 'supra-human Cosmic Something', akin to the being of
traditional ontotheology. Undoubtedly, it would be wrong to take Heidegger's
being as a new kind of Absolute; however, Farin argues, no respected Heidegger
scholar has actually done this. The position that Sheehan promises to critique
is, therefore, not a legitimate target. Nonetheless, Sheehan's critique starts
with an affirmation of the intrinsic relation between Sein and Dasein: that is,
the 'reciprocity between being and man'. According to Farin, it would seem that
this *reciprocity* becomes Sheehan's preferred object to hypostasise, instead of
being; consequently, Dasein is given an unprecedented priority in Sheehan's
reading of Heidegger -- so much so that, as explained above, being isn't even
the central concern for Sheehan's Heidegger; instead, Dasein takes centre-stage,
and the word 'being' is merely shorthand for the *meaningful presence* of things
'within the worlds of human interests and concerns'. For Sheehan, therefore,
nothing can be said of a being outside of its involvement with Dasein's (human)
affairs. Now, since *world* is the horizon in which Dasein encounters meaningful
things, and (for Sheehan) meaningful presence *is* being, world is the
'equivalent to being'. At this point, we see the first shortcoming of Sheehan's
work; namely, that he conflates multiple distinct concepts in Heidegger's
thought: for Sheehan, world, meaningfulness, being, Lichtung, thrownness, 'the
open', and Ereignis are all various ways of expressing the same thing. The
'focal meaning' of this same thing, as Farin sees it, is Dasein. To this end,
Sheehan claims that 'Heidegger's philosophy in a nutshell' can be expressed with
one sentence: 'Metaphorically speaking, as thrown-open (i.e., appropriated),
human being is the "open space" or clearing within which the meaningful presence
of things can occur.'

This, however, takes us to a second critique of Sheehan's work. Though he
claims that Dasein is the central figure of Heidegger's entire career (and that
whenever it isn't, Heidegger has simply made a mistake; the being-historical
texts, for example, are dismissed as 'outside the pale of serious discussion'),
Sheehan seems to reduce Dasein to a pure Cartesian ego. As Farin notes, Dasein
is correctly interpreted by Sheehan as an inherently hermeneutic being; however,
he claims, 'for Sheehan "being hermeneutical" means nothing more than the
levelled-down idea that we as humans happen "to make sense" of things'. As such,
Heidegger's 'anti-Cartesian and historical dimension opened up by hermeneutics'
is lost. More explicitly, Sheehan himself identifies the ineluctable hermeneusis
of human being as 'the unavoidable truth of Descartes' *ego cogito*'. Thus,
despite equating Dasein with the world and the clearing, Sheehan has rendered
his Dasein to be a timeless, placeless subjectivity -- directly contradicting
Heidegger's project.

What is the result of Sheehan's equating Dasein, the worldly hermeneut, with
the disembodied subjectivity of modernity? Again, it is a direct contradiction
of Heidegger's work; in this instance, of Heidegger's anti-modernism. 'Modern
subjectivity', Sheehan writes, 'is a glorious fact that should be celebrated,
along with all its humanizing achievements, including calculative thinking,
scientific discoveries, and technological advances. [... Heidegger's thought]
in no way puts the brakes on such achievements'. As Farin correctly points out,
this sentiment is one that was passionately challenged by Heidegger, from *Being
and Time* to the *Black Notebooks*.

If Farin's essay is correct, then *Making Sense* has failed to bring about a
paradigm shift in the reading of Heidegger. Instead, Sheehan has to a great
extent assimilated Heidegger's work into a much less contentious project; the
writings outside of *Being and Time* (particularly those on the event and the
fourfold) are rejected as unnecessary distortions of the earlier work, and the
centrality of being is replaced with a focus on human subjectivity as the ground
of (subjective) meaningful presence.

In the 29^th^ issue of *Parrhesia*, Sheehan responded to Farin in an essay
entitled 'Which Heidegger? A Response to Ingo Farin'. The paper was given this
title since, according to Sheehan, Farin's criticisms must have come from the
fact that each of them were reading 'different Heideggers'. 'Which Heidegger?'
makes an attempt to re-defend the thesis that Sein is not, in fact, 'the core of
Heidegger's thought'. In doing so, Sheehan cites two passages (in the
*Heraclitus Seminar* and the *Four Seminars*) wherein Heidegger claims that his
work has no more 'use', no more 'room', for 'the word *Sein*'. As Sheehan points
out, even William J. Richardson -- the original defender of the centrality of
being to Heidegger's thought -- notes that the word *Sein* 'has almost
completely disappeared from [the later Heidegger's] vocabulary'. The argument
of *Making Sense*, therefore, was that 'Sein' was merely a provisional term in
the journey towards meaningful presence, just as mere 'presence' was once a
provisional term for being. Sheehan's project is therefore one of *making*
*distinctions*, as he himself insists; Farin's criticism therefore fails on
behalf of its failure to recognise these distinctions. The majority of 'Which
Heidegger?' is therefore a clarification of (seven) different distinctions.

Firstly, Sheehan recognises a distinction in Heidegger between Sein as the
being of beings [*Sein des Seienden*] and Sein as the *clearing* [*Lichtung*]
that makes the being of beings possible; this is the first distinction, he
argues, that Farin overlooked. As such, though Farin is correct (according to
Sheehan) to recognise the correlativity between being and human being, he never
specifies *which* being he refers to; consequently, his entire critique is
hindered by this ambiguity.

Secondly, Farin has supposedly overlooked the difference between 'metaphysical
*Sein* and phenomenological *Anwesen*'. To do so is not only to deny the central
thesis of *Making Sense* (namely, that Sein is a provisional term for the
meaningful presence of things in the contexts of human concern), but also to
deny 'Heidegger's own position throughout the half-century of his career'.
Sheehan claims to find evidence of Heidegger's doctrine that being is
subjective, phenomenal presence in a text that Farin himself translated (*The
Concept of Time*), where Heidegger writes, for example, that our 'surrounding
world is present [*anwesend*] not as a thing-like object [*Dingobjekt*] but as
significance [*Bedeutsamkeit*]'. Likewise, in *Being and Time* (for instance, at
74.31-34) Heidegger identifies Vorhandenheit and Zuhandenheit -- categories of
meaningful presence -- as the *being* of various beings; not merely as imposed
pragmatic labels. In ignoring this fact, Farin is therefore ignoring the
consistently and necessarily *phenomenological* character of Heidegger's
ontology.

