### Joan Stambaugh

Stambaugh uses her introduction to Heidegger's *On Time and Being* to outline
how Heidegger's later work marks a change from his earlier work (i.e., in *Being
and Time*).[^4] The name of the lecture -- 'Time and Being' -- suggests that
Heidegger has in some way reversed the work he carried out in *Being and Time*.
However, Stambaugh claims, the reality is more complicated: the 'concepts' of
Heidegger's early work find themselves transformed in *Time and Being*, but the
original intentions behind them remain intact.

What are these concepts? What is this intention? In *Being and Time*, Stambaugh
says, Heidegger's project was to move from a phenomenological interpretation of
human being toward a fundamental ontology of being as such. In his hermeneutics
of human being, Heidegger found that the fundamental character of the human
being [*Dasein*] is *being-in-the-world*, and that Dasein is always already
related to the world by means of 'care' [*Sorge*] -- its awareness of things
both ready to hand [*Zuhanden*] and merely 'present' [*Vorhanden*].  Husserl had
already thoroughly expanded on the *intentionality* of human consciousness
(i.e., the necessary condition whereby consciousness is always consciousness *of
something*); Heidegger expanded on the *way* in which Dasein is directed towards
these things. The *necessity* of Dasein's 'caring' -- that is, the fact that
Dasein is *always already* aware of, and engaged with, the world -- is what
shows that there is no worldless subject (as in Descartes).

According to Stambaugh, Heidegger's description of being-in-the-world was still
'within the Kantian framework' of transcendental philosophy.  Human being --
that is, Dasein -- is structured as a 'caring' (or 'concerned', or 'aware')
being-in-the-world, and *time* is the *condition of possibility* of this caring.
Dasein is 'ekstatic' -- that is, outside of itself -- in three ways: past,
present, and future. This outsideness-from-itself is what makes Dasein an *open*
being, aware of itself and of other beings that it takes concern with. However,
it is this very understanding of temporality that draws Heidegger away from
transcendental philosophy (and from traditional philosophy in general),
Stambaugh claims. When, at the end of *Being and Time*, Heidegger suggests that
temporality might be the horizon of being, he 'relinquishes the question of
causality and conditions of possibility', and moves toward an *overcoming* of
all metaphysics and ontology, since '[h]orizon has to do with directionality and
openness, not with causality'. Looking for fundamental causes or grounds, in the
tradition of Kant, is for Heidegger equivalent to theology's search for the
*causa sui* and *summum ens*. Thus, all hitherto existing philosophy has been
'ontotheology' for Heidegger, and it must be overcome. However, with the end of
*philosophy* comes the task of *thinking*.

Stambaugh explains that, for Heidegger, non-metaphysical 'thinking' is carried
out as an analysis of the *history* of being, which has been pushed along by the
event of 'appropriation' [*Ereignis* -- also translated as event or 'enowning'].
Throughout the history of philosophy, Heidegger says, being has been understood
in one way or another as *presence*. The particular kind of presence that being
is understood to be has changed not through a dialectical process (as in Hegel),
'but in sudden epochal transformations which cannot be plotted out in advance'.
Stambaugh lists the various kinds of presence that Heidegger identifies in the
history of philosophy: the One, the Logos, *idea*, *ousia*, *energeia*,
substance, actuality, perception, the monad, objectivity, self-positing in the
will of reason, love, spirit, power, and 'the will to will in the eternal
recurrence of the same'. The beginning of metaphysics, Heidegger claims, was in
Plato's separation of being (in the realm of forms) and time (in the *becoming*
of actually existing things); as such, in order to escape metaphysics, Heidegger
must think being as 'other than that which never changes', and he must think
time 'other than as the perishable, constantly changing realm of existence'.
Stambaugh sketches an outline of the way Heidegger handles this twofold task.

1. *Being*: because 'being' has been so fundamental to metaphysical terminology, it is used
less and less as Heidegger's work develops.  He favours the term Ereignis
because, unlike 'being', Ereignis does not designate a particular 'realm' or
totality of things (i.e., it does not seem irrevocably attached to being*s*);
instead, it designates a relation: 'that of man and Being'. Like Nietzsche,
Bergson, and Whitehead, Stambaugh explains, Heidegger's use of Ereignis shows
him to understand being as an activity or process.  But *unlike* the processes
described by these other thinkers, Ereignis is non-metaphysical, 'because in the
relationship between man and Being as appropriated to each other, the relation
is more fundamental than what is related'.

2. *Time*: since Aristotle, metaphysics has understood time as a series of 'now' moments
that, perplexingly, seem to have no structure (Stambaugh quotes Kant -- 'time
has no shape'). The response to this puzzle was to 'spatialise' time (presumably
as a line), and thereby dismiss the event of 'occurrence' by, instead, focusing
entirely on the *present* (or the 'presents' as a linear sequence of 'now'
moments). Heidegger avoids this reduction by moving away from *presents* and
towards *presence*: future is 'the withholding of presence', and past is 'the
refusal of presence'. The two exist in a reciprocal relation. This account is
non-metaphysical because it requires no 'now' to be present; it thereby thinks
*presence* as such, without recourse to a thing being presented.

Stambaugh concludes with just a clue towards the content of *Time and
Being*: 'Time is the way in which Appropriation appropriates'. If we can
say that 'there is' [*es gibt*] being, then appropriation is the 'it'
[*es*] that 'gives' [*gibt*] being.
