## Thinking Through Heidegger

---

The following is an attempt to put my own thoughts on Heidegger, my 'evaluation'
of his work, into writing. There will be few cited references to secondary
texts, but this shouldn't be taken as an indication that my thoughts are wholly
unique: they are, inevitably, informed by interpreters of Heidegger, but in this
writing I am not aiming to faithfully reconstruct the work of any of those
interpreters.

To start with -- how are we to read Heidegger? It would be wrong to read all
works of philosophy as mere autobiography; however, it would also be wrong to
project a philosopher out of concrete human life and suggest that they were
immune from letting their life enter into their thought. Heidegger himself
writes:

> Regarding the personality of a philosopher, our only interest is that he was
> born at a certain time, that he worked, and that he died. The character of the
> philosopher, and issues of that sort, will not be addressed here.[^1]

Here, he either forgets or ignores that the thinking of a philosopher -- the
fact 'that he worked' -- *is* an 'issue of character'. The work of a philosopher
is an attempt to *overcome* oneself; it is the concrete particulars of human
life that provoke thought, and it is the task of thought to find the universal
in these particulars. This is why studying philosophy is equivalent to studying
the history of philosophy: our task is to recognise the tension, the dialectical
relationship, between a philosopherâ€™s life and their thought.

In trying to overcome themselves (their finitude, contingency -- their life)
through philosophy, the philosopher's thought both *is* and is *not* their life.

Importantly, and for this reason, it is wrong to speak of 'the racism problem in
Kant', or 'the fascism problem in Heidegger'. The moral-political 'problem' is
not separable from the philosophical problem of the thinker as a whole; thus
there is only *'the Kant problem'*, or *'the Heidegger problem'*, and so on, in
which questions of racism or fascism arise.  In separating the life-problems of
a thinker from their philosophical work, one has already assumed that the
thinker was able to successfully and entirely overcome their life through
philosophy. (In general, the incessant division of philosophy into 'topics' or
'issues' is a bad sign.)

I understand Heidegger's project to be calling for a kind of awakening. In the
exergue to *Being and Time*, he invokes the Platonic theme of forgetting: we
have *forgotten* the meaning of being. Moreover, he claims, we have forgotten
even to be *perplexed* by our forgetting! What is perplexion or confusion? It is
the affect that arises when one possesses some vague idea of something; an idea
which is so buried over, so neutralised and disguised as 'common sense', that it
is no longer meaningfully questionable. Insofar as *Being and Time* works
towards *asking the question of the meaning of being*, therefore, it sees
Heidegger pushing us intentionally toward confusion. As such, the 'awakening' I
find in Heidegger's work is an awakening to confusion: more than he wants to
defend any particular position, or demonstrate any particular proposition,
Heidegger wants his readers (and, really, 'the West' as a whole) to face
themselves up to a *mystery*: namely, 'the one mystery' of being itself.[^2]

'Dasein' enters Heidegger's work early on, as the being for whom the awakening
is possible: Dasein is the only entity for whom being is an issue, and thus it
is only Dasein who can face up to the mystery of being. Insofar as Heidegger
talks about the 'meaning' of being, it would seem that he must consider the
being *for whom* things are meaningful; this is why, in my judgment, his project
begins with a focus on Dasein. The mistake of so much scholarship on Heidegger
is to subsequently take Dasein as the central concept for *all* of Heidegger's
work, and thus reduce Heidegger to a theorist of social relations (Dreyfus), a
quasi-Kantian transcendental critic (Carman), or a strange philosopher for whom
being and meaningfulness (or 'intelligibility') are the same thing (Sheehan).
This is a profoundly misguided reading which, it seems to me, is founded upon
the false assumption that *Being and Time* is the apex of Heidegger's work,
rather than the introduction to his project. In defence of my reading, we need
only look again to the exergue to *Being and Time*:

> ...are we nowadays even perplexed at our inability to understand the
> expression 'being'? Not at all. So first of all we must reawaken an
> understanding for the meaning of this question. The aim of the following
> treatise is to work out the question of the meaning of *"being"* and to do so
> concretely. The provisional aim is the interpretation of *time* as the
> possible horizon for any understanding whatsoever of being.[^3]

Here, in the very first sentences, Heidegger is explicit that his book is only
an *opening*, wherein a question is asked: namely, the question 'what does
"being" mean?'. Now, Heidegger also refers to 'the interpretation of *time*' as
part of the question-asking; in my view, this is the aspect of *Being and Time*
which is most haphazard, and undergoes the greatest transformation and
distortion throughout Heidegger's career. In other words, I grant that his
overall project lacks consistency insofar as he initially promises that *time*
will be the horizonal concept of his thinking -- as his work progresses, he
retains the insistence on a horizon, but does not keep 'time' as the mark of
this horizon.
